docs(MADR): resource identifier format (#12756)
kumahq/kuma: docs/madr/decisions/070-resource-identifier.md

# Resource Identifier

* Status: accepted

## Context and Problem Statement

Kuma multizone mode allows synchronizing state between multiple clusters. Zone Control Planes connect to the Global Control Plane, forming a tree with the Global CP as the root.

There are several resource synchronization patterns:
- A resource is created on the Global CP and synced down to all Zone CPs.
- A resource is created on a Zone CP and synced to the Global CP.
- A resource is created on a Zone CP and synced to other Zone CPs.

For example, the Zone CP in `zone-1` can possess the following MeshTimeouts:
- MeshTimeouts created in `zone-1`
- MeshTimeouts created on the Global CP and synced to `zone-1`
- MeshTimeouts created in `zone-2` and synced to `zone-1`

To uniquely identify a resource regardless of its place of origin, Kuma uses the following Go structure:

```go
type ResourceIdentifier struct {
    Name      string
    Mesh      string
    Namespace string

>     Zone      string

Reviewer: what is in zone when policy originates from global? I don't remember and it might be good to add this

Author: it's empty, I added a comment

Core name is very complex and can take different forms depending on the resource origin and on the environment:
* on Universal, it's `<name>`, it is a column in PostgreSQL `resources` table
* on Kubernetes, core name is `<name>.<namespace>`, name and namespace from metadata
* when resource is synced from another cluster core name contains hash-suffix

For example, when running Global on Kubernetes the core name for synced DPP might look like `my-dpp-0-x4x9bbd4vw89f4fx.kuma-system`.

#### [Issue #2363](https://github.com/kumahq/kuma/issues/2363): Stop using ':' in envoy resource names

Envoy admin pages use `:`
```bash
$ curl http://localhost:9901/listeners
inbound:127.0.0.1:8000::127.0.0.1:8000
```

There is a workaround to use `format=json`
```bash
$ curl http://localhost:9901/listeners\?format\=json
{
 "listener_statuses": [
  {
   "name": "inbound:127.0.0.1:8000",
   "local_address": {
    "socket_address": {
     "address": "127.0.0.1",
     "port_value": 8000
    }
   }
  }
 ]
}
```

#### [Issue #3249](https://github.com/kumahq/kuma/issues/3249): local envoy clusters should have a better name than localhost_<port> 

> Today local clusters have name `localhost:<port>` and in stats they're visible as `localhost_<port>`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Today inbound clusters have name `localhost:<port>` and in stats they're visible as `localhost_<port>`.
```

That's not very informative.

#### [Issue #12733](https://github.com/kumahq/kuma/issues/12733): Envoy statPrefix should not use ip addresses

Using IP address in envoy config statPrefix field can cause issues or generate unnecessary changes in metrics.
This is also problematic for our e2e tests that test envoy config using golden files.

#### [Issue #12093](https://github.com/kumahq/kuma/issues/12093): xds configs, outbound listeners should use the clustername instead of an IP/port combo

> We name outbounds like `outbound:10.43.205.116:6379` where IP address doesn't give any useful information.

Reviewer 2: Even more when there are multiple IPs right?

### Places to use resource identifier

> #### URL path

Reviewer 3: Could it be that the resource identifier is being used in URL search query, i.e. for filtering?

Author: As it's not a hard requirement, I added as a note what resource identifier and delimiter charset would look like if we wanted to support URL query:
```
resource-identifier = *(ALPHA / DIGIT / "-" / "." / "_" / "~" )
delimiter           = "_" / "~" 
```
they're significantly smaller than those without query support. 

But the good news is if we go with `_` then the resource identifier can be used in a query. So I added this to the `Pros` list

Reviewer 3: Great, thank you 🙂

Reviewer 4: (P.S. but one small benefit of not having non-URL safe characters is that it keeps the identifier "pretty" i.e. more recognisable, so a benefit but not super important I would say)

Reviewer 3: Still good point @johncowen, but as you said I also think generally it'd be better to not use any non-URL safe chars.

Also depending on what people/tools are using, there might be a difference on which chars are encoded (i.e. `encodeURI` vs `encodeURIComponent`:

```javascript
encodeURI("http://localhost:1234?filter[foo&bar]=baz") // -> 'http://localhost:1234?filter%5Bfoo&bar%5D=baz'

encodeURIComponent("filter[foo&bar]=baz") // -> 'filter%5Bfoo%26bar%5D%3Dbaz'
```

[encodeURI](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/encodeURI#description)
> encodeURI() escapes all characters except:
>
>```
>A–Z a–z 0–9 - _ . ! ~ * ' ( )
>
>; / ? : @ & = + $ , #
> ````
>
>The characters on the second line are characters that may be part of the URI syntax, and are only escaped by encodeURIComponent(). Both encodeURI() and encodeURIComponent() do not encode the characters -.!~*'(), known as "unreserved marks", which do not have a reserved purpose but are allowed in a URI "as is". (See [RFC2396](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2396))

[encodeURIComponent](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/encodeURIComponent#description)
> encodeURIComponent() uses the same encoding algorithm as described in [encodeURI()](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/encodeURI). It escapes all characters except:
>
>```
>A–Z a–z 0–9 - _ . ! ~ * ' ( )
>```
>
>Compared to [encodeURI()](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/encodeURI), encodeURIComponent() escapes a larger set of characters. Use encodeURIComponent() on user-entered fields from forms [POST](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Methods/POST)'d to the server — this will encode & symbols that may inadvertently be generated during data entry for [character references](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/Character_reference) or other characters that require encoding/decoding. For example, if a user writes Jack & Jill, without encodeURIComponent(), the ampersand could be interpreted on the server as the start of a new field and jeopardize the integrity of the data.

Reviewer 4: Yeah gotcha, couple of follow ups:

I'd say people should always use `encodeURIComponent` otherwise they are "holding it wrong" and should change implementation, and I suppose this is my point on expecting people to do always do this how we expect/correctly, there will always be cases where some folks might be "holding it wrong". To be fair, all "values" used in a URL should be using `encodeURIComponent` (or non-JS equivalent) anyway, whether they are expected to be safe or not. So there's also something to be said for not worrying about URL safety, if someone isn't using a correct encoder, they should be. But I'm thinking more about informal "I just want to curl the thing to get a response in my terminal" type of usage. There's benefit in not forcing people to have to encode the thing if for example we chose to use `/` in this case.

So if we want URL safe if only for reasons of "don't make it hard for people to just curl the thing" all in all according to the MADR, that leaves us with:

```
delimiter = "_" / "~"
```

And it sounds like we've landed on a `_`, which is URL safe which is super duper. It's probably a good idea to note that I have seen instances of people using these in hostnames even though a `_` shouldn't be used in hostnames.

@lobkovilya I'm not sure if we validate things like mesh names and zone names to not have `_`, I might be misremembering but do I remember that at least at one point this was possible? Is it definitely not possible to have a mesh/zone name with a `_` in it now?

Just a little side note that's just occurred to me, I'm kinda glad we still have this last "safe character" available `~`, which in a past life has been super useful to have as a usable/meaningful character (i.e. similar to `~/johncowen`), which kinda means "expand `~` to a common string we know about". You never know we might hit a thing at somepoint where we need the same "trick".

Reviewer 2: > I'm not sure if we validate things like mesh names and zone names to not have _, I might be misremembering but do I remember that at least at one point this was possible? Is it definitely not possible to have a mesh/zone name with a _ in it now?

I believe it's no longer supported as this was needed for correct k8s support. But @lobkovilya should check/confirm. I think @jijiechen just removed the back compat in fact

Reviewer 5: I don't remember in which PR that I removed this compatibility. I've just tested on 2.9.3 and confirmed that we still have this validation: 

When I was trying to create a `Mesh` object with name `default_2`, I got this error:

```
Error: Could not process a resource (Resource is not valid)
* name: invalid characters. A lowercase RFC 1123 subdomain must consist of lower case alphanumeric characters, '-' or '.', and must start and end with an alphanumeric character
```

              / path-rootless   ; begins with a segment
              / path-empty      ; zero characters

path-abempty  = *( "/" segment )
path-absolute = "/" [ segment-nz *( "/" segment ) ]
path-noscheme = segment-nz-nc *( "/" segment )
path-rootless = segment-nz *( "/" segment )
path-empty    = 0<pchar>

segment       = *pchar
segment-nz    = 1*pchar
segment-nz-nc = 1*( unreserved / pct-encoded / sub-delims / "@" )
              ; non-zero-length segment without any colon ":"

pchar         = unreserved / pct-encoded / sub-delims / ":" / "@"

unreserved    = ALPHA / DIGIT / "-" / "." / "_" / "~"
pct-encoded   = "%" HEXDIG HEXDIG
sub-delims    = "!" / "$" / "&" / "'" / "(" / ")"
                 / "*" / "+" / "," / ";" / "="
```

#### Envoy resource names

For the context, there is already [MADR](036-internal-listeners.md) that regulated the name of internal listeners.
Also, there was [work](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1OIZK82Tr-4El2FfdlBn7WNRZ7FatkTuEcZKH0FlSTMA/edit?tab=t.0#heading=h.n6cmlf1eel2z) related to Envoy cluster name unification, but it's not finished.
Discoveries in this work helped me to fill the tables.

> There are no restriction on the name format from the Envoy's side.

Reviewer 2: Even in length?

Author: Envoy doesn't specify a length limit. I tried to create a cluster with the max expected length of resource identifier 
```
253(name) + 253(zone) + 63(mesh) + 63(namespace) + 15(sectionName) + 30(resourcetype) + 3(kri) + 6(_) = 686
```
and it worked as expected.

Reviewer 2: And I think there's no lims for prom label length either: https://prometheus.io/docs/concepts/data_model/#metric-names-and-labels

Reviewer 2: otel has a length limit defined in the SDK api: https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/common/#attribute-limits

However, it states the default in infinity.
We should add these in this MADR for reference.

Author: Added in the MADR

| Outbound Listener | `outbound:10.43.205.116:8080`<br>`outbound:[2001:0db8:85a3:0000:0000:8a2e:0370:7334]:8080`                                                                                                              | Mesh*Service (with sectionName to select port) |
| VirtualHost       | legacy listeners - `<kuma.io/service>`<br>new outbounds - `<mesh>_<name>_<namespace>_<zone>_<short-name>_<port>`                                                                                        | Mesh*Service (with sectionName to select port) |
| Inbound Cluster   | `localhost:<port>`                                                                                                                                                                                      | Dataplane (with sectionName to select port)    |
| Outbound Cluster  | legacy clusters - `<kuma.io/service>-hash(dst.tags)`<br>legacy clusters cross-mesh - `<kuma.io/service>-hash(dst.tags)_<mesh>`<br>new clusters - `<mesh>_<name>_<namespace>_<zone>_<short-name>_<port>` | Mesh*Service (with sectionName to select port) |

> | Route             | Routes are set on Listener on VirtualHost.<br>On inbound - `inbound:<kuma.io/service>`<br>On outbound - `<hash_sha256([]Match{...})>`                                                                   | Correlates with a set of MeshHTTPRoutes        |

Reviewer: what about `matches` section in new inbound policies api? We might not have a route as a resource but create route from policy

Author: Even for outbound routes it says `Correlates with a set of MeshHTTPRoutes`. So it's not really clear how to name the route without hashing

Reviewer 2: Ho that's quite an important issue no? AFAIR there's no "merging" in routes no? Can't we use the child route that matches this branch with the sectionName?

Reviewer 2: Also routes are specific to a listener IIRC no?

Author: There is merging in routes, but I think we're still good and we can name routes in envoy by the name of the most specific MeshHTTPRoute (I guess you were referring to it as "child route"?).

For example, there are producer and consumer routes:
```yaml
kind: MeshHTTPRoute
metadata:
  name: producer-route
  namespace: backend-ns
spec:
  to:
    - targetRef:
        kind: MeshService
        name: backend
      rules:
        - matches:
            - path:
                type: PathPrefix
                value: "/api"
          default: $conf1
        - matches:
            - path:
                type: PathPrefix
                value: "/gui"
          default: $conf2
---
kind: MeshHTTPRoute
metadata:
  name: consumer-route
  namespace: frontend-ns
spec:
  to:
    - targetRef:
        kind: MeshService
        name: backend
        namespace: backend-ns
      rules:
        - matches:
            - path:
                type: PathPrefix
                value: "/api"
          default: $conf3
        - matches:
            - path:
                type: PathPrefix
                value: "/path-of-consumers-interest"
          default: $conf4
```

In consumer's Envoy they're going to result in:

```yaml
routes:
  - name: kri_default_us-east-2_frontend-ns_consumer-route
    match:
      path: "/api"
    route: merge([$conf1, $conf3]).to_envoy_route()
  - name: kri_default_us-east-2_frontend-ns_consumer-route
    match:
      path: "/path-of-consumers-interest"
    route: merge([$conf4]).to_envoy_route()
  - name: kri_default_us-west-2_backend-ns_producer-route
    match:
      path: "/gui"
    route: merge([$conf2]).to_envoy_route()
```

Author: Updated

| Secret            | `name       = <category>:<scope>:<identifier>`<br>`category   = "mesh_ca" \| "identity_cert"`<br>`scope      = "secret"`<br>`identifier = "all" \| <mesh_name>`                                         | TODO                                           |

##### Builtin Gateway

|             | Name                                                                                                                                                                                                                           | Correlated Resources                    |
|-------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------|

> | Listener    | `<gateway-name>:<protocol>:<port>` where `gateway-name` is `MeshGatewayResource.Meta.Name`                                                                                                                                     | MeshGateway                             |

Reviewer: gateway listeners have name, so maybe this should be treated as `sectionName`? in this case

Author: yeah, I think that's exactly the idea in [Gateway API](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/concepts/api-overview/#how-it-works):
> SectionName When sectionName is set, the Route selects the listener with the specified name.

I updated the doc

```
envoy_cluster_upstream_cx_total{envoy_cluster_name="localhost_5000"} 0
```
so there is no reason to replace `:` with `_`.

If Envoy tried to support StatsD format then there are still a question, why `stat_prefix` emits metrics with `:` but `alt_stat_name` replaces `:` with `_`.
Also, StatsD format doesn't seem to be supported out-of-the-box by Envoy and requires configuring `stats_sinks` in the static config.

### Constraints

#### What characters we can use in the identifier?
 
In URL path segment we can use:

```
ALPHA / DIGIT / "-" / "." / "_" / "~" / "!" / "$" / "&" / "'" / "(" / ")" / "*" / "+" / "," / ";" / "=" / ":" / "@"
```

In Envoy resource names we can use any character except `:` if we want to solve [Issue #2363](https://github.com/kumahq/kuma/issues/2363) without workaround.

In Envoy stats fields we can use any character except `:` to avoid on the fly conversion of `:` to `_` for Cluster names in Prometheus labels.

This leaves us with the following charset:

```
resource-identifier = *(ALPHA / DIGIT / "-" / "." / "_" / "~" / "!" / "$" / "&" / "'" / "(" / ")" / "*" / "+" / "," / ";" / "=" / "@")

> ```

Reviewer 2: Shouldn't we use something that is compatible with the statsD charsets for label values?
It doesn't seem that otel has limitations but we should at least mention it here: https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/semconv/

Author: AFAIU statsD as a format doesn't have a way to put a label or tag on a metric https://github.com/statsd/statsd/issues/619, i.e. DD had to extend the format and created [DogStatsD](https://docs.datadoghq.com/developers/dogstatsd/?tab=hostagent#tags). 

For otel attributes there are indeed no limitation, I'm going to add this to the doc https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/common/?utm_source=chatgpt.com#attribute

* `name` and `zone`
  * contain no more than 253 characters
  * contain only lowercase alphanumeric characters, '-' or '.'
  * start with an alphanumeric character
  * end with an alphanumeric character
* `mesh`
  * contain no more than 63 characters
  * contain only lowercase alphanumeric characters, '-' or '.'
  * start with an alphanumeric character
  * end with an alphanumeric character
* `namespace`
  * contain at most 63 characters
  * contain only lowercase alphanumeric characters or '-'
  * start with an alphanumeric character
  * end with an alphanumeric character
* `resourceType`
  * only alphanumeric
* `sectionName`
  * contain at most 15 characters
  * contain only lowercase alphanumeric characters or '-'

This leaves us with the following charset:

```
delimiter = "_" / "~" / "!" / "$" / "&" / "'" / "(" / ")" / "*" / "+" / "," / ";" / "=" / "@"
```

## Decision Drivers

- New Inspect API endpoints that'd allow getting resolved configuration by the resource identifier
- Kuma API GET endpoints shouldn't require core name to read the resource 
- Human-readable: users should be able to type the identifier manually if needed, so it's not hashed

> - Envoy resources that have direct correlation with Kuma resources should be named by using resource identifier, i.e. outbound cluster can be named after MeshService

Reviewer 2: I think another decision driver is being able to use these in prom queries.

.e.g:

```
my_metric{envoy_cluster_name~="kri.*_meshservice_.*"} // Get only actual outbounds from meshservice
```

```
my_metric{envoy_cluster_name~="kri_default_.*.*"} // Get only stuff on the default mesh
```

## Considered Options

* Option 1 - Order-based, no field names in the identifier
* Option 2 - Field names in the identifier

## Decision Outcome

* Option 1 - Order-based, no field names in the identifier

## Pros and Cons of the Options

### Option 1 - Order-based, no field names in the identifier

We need to pick a delimiter that's present in the `delimiter` charset we've specified above.

> There is an identifier format from Amazon called [ARN](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/IAM/latest/UserGuide/reference-arns.html). We can adopt a similar approach, but using `_`:

Reviewer 2: It's also ensure no overlap between internal entities (prefixed by _kuma) and the rest.

```

> kri_<mesh>_<zone>_<namespace>_<resource-type>_<resource-name>_<section-name>

Reviewer: did we considered having some placeholder for missing values? to avoid multiple _ which can be hard to read?

Reviewer 2: You need to be explicit about resource-type. Is it the plural/camlCase...?

Reviewer 2: Why not have the resource type before the mesh or at least before the zone?

Author: > did we considered having some placeholder for missing values? to avoid multiple _ which can be hard to read?

what would you use as a placeholder?

Reviewer 4: > Why not have the resource type before the mesh or at least before the zone?

I kinda agree with is, if the resource-type is before anything else, then you can immediately tell whether to expect say an empty mesh in the case of the kri pointing to something that doesn't have a `mesh`

Reviewer 2: Makes sense for the ordering

Author: > I kinda agree with is, if the resource-type is before anything else, then you can immediately tell whether to expect say an empty mesh in the case of the kri pointing to a resource type that doesn't have a mesh

Yeah, probably you're right, it's better to have the first parameter that can't be empty, i.e. `kri_zoneingress__us-east-1_kuma-system_zi-1`. I'm going to change the order then to
```
kri_<resource-type>_<mesh>_<zone>_<namespace>_<resource-name>_<section-name>
```

Author: Changed the order

              ; non-zero-length segment without any colon ":"

pchar         = unreserved / pct-encoded / sub-delims / ":" / "@"

unreserved    = ALPHA / DIGIT / "-" / "." / "_" / "~"
pct-encoded   = "%" HEXDIG HEXDIG
sub-delims    = "!" / "$" / "&" / "'" / "(" / ")"
                 / "*" / "+" / "," / ";" / "="
```

#### URL query

There are no immediate plans to put resource identifier in URL query, but if we want in the future then we have to limit the charset to:
```
query       = *( pchar / "/" / "?" )
```

#### Envoy resource names

For the context, there is already [MADR](036-internal-listeners.md) that regulated the name of internal listeners.
Also, there was [work](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1OIZK82Tr-4El2FfdlBn7WNRZ7FatkTuEcZKH0FlSTMA/edit?tab=t.0#heading=h.n6cmlf1eel2z) related to Envoy cluster name unification, but it's not finished.
Discoveries in this work helped me to fill the tables.

There are no restriction on the name format from the Envoy's side.
Some Envoy resources could be directly correlated with Kuma resources and that's why we should consider renaming them using the resource identifier.

> There are tables below for all Kuma proxies. Resources in `Internal` table exist in all proxies. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The tables below are an inventory of resource usage for all Kuma proxies. Resources in `Internal` table exist in all proxies. 
```

> Column "Correlated Resources" provides the Kuma resources that could be used for naming. 

Author: Added a new column `ResourceIdentifier`

| VirtualHost       | legacy listeners - `<kuma.io/service>`<br>new outbounds - `<mesh>_<name>_<namespace>_<zone>_<short-name>_<port>`                                                                                        | Mesh*Service (with sectionName to select port) |
| Inbound Cluster   | `localhost:<port>`                                                                                                                                                                                      | Dataplane (with sectionName to select port)    |
| Outbound Cluster  | legacy clusters - `<kuma.io/service>-hash(dst.tags)`<br>legacy clusters cross-mesh - `<kuma.io/service>-hash(dst.tags)_<mesh>`<br>new clusters - `<mesh>_<name>_<namespace>_<zone>_<short-name>_<port>` | Mesh*Service (with sectionName to select port) |
| Route             | Routes are set on Listener on VirtualHost.<br>On inbound - `inbound:<kuma.io/service>`<br>On outbound - `<hash_sha256([]Match{...})>`                                                                   | Correlates with a set of MeshHTTPRoutes        |

> | Secret            | `name       = <category>:<scope>:<identifier>`<br>`category   = "mesh_ca" \| "identity_cert"`<br>`scope      = "secret"`<br>`identifier = "all" \| <mesh_name>`                                         | TODO                                           |

Reviewer 2: That'd be the kri no?

Author: It turned out to be less straightforward with Secrets. Only `mesh_ca` in `builtin` mode has a real secret resource in the store we could use for `kri`. In all other cases, secrets are either generated in memory (i.e. `identity_cert`), or obtained using DataSource (i.e. CA provided), or fetched from external places (i.e. Vault). As we don't have problems with secret naming at that moment and also naming requirements are not yet clear for secrets, I'd move them out of the scope of this MADR. I've added a section:

> #### Secrets naming in Envoy
>
> Renaming secrets in Envoy is out of the scope of this MADR. Only `mesh_ca` secret in `builtin` mode has a corresponding Secret resource in the store. In all other cases, secrets are either stored in memory, or obtained using DataSource or fetched from external systems, so it's not straightforward how to apply `kri` concept. Also, it's not clear what problems and limitations do we have when it comes to naming secrets in Envoy.

|             | Name                                                                                                                                                                                                                           | Correlated Resources                                  |
|-------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------|
| Listener    | `<gateway-name>:<protocol>:<port>` where `gateway-name` is `MeshGatewayResource.Meta.Name`                                                                                                                                     | MeshGateway (with sectionName to select the listener) |
| VirtualHost | `<hostname>`                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                       |

> | Cluster     | `<kuma.io/service>-hash(merge(dpp.tags, gateway.tags, listener.tags))`                                                                                                                                                         | Pair of MeshGateway and Mesh*Service                  |

Reviewer 2: So what does this actually look like?

Author: Not much we can do right now as we generate a unique cluster per MeshGateway listener. I looked a bit into this and I think we should be able to stop doing that. I've created an issue https://github.com/kumahq/kuma/issues/13129 and referenced it in the MADR. Once we get rid of hash-suffixes in MeshGateway cluster names we can go with `kri` from Mesh*Service.

| Internal Cluster | `kuma:readiness`<br>`kuma:envoy:admin`<br>`kuma:metrics:hijacker`<br>`_kuma:metrics:opentelemetry:<backendName>`<br>`tracing:`<br>`access_log_sink`<br>`ads_cluster` | –                    |

#### Envoy stats

There are 2 fields to specify alternative name for emitting stats – `stat_prefix`, `alt_stat_name`.
Field `alt_stat_name` is used only for Cluster, and it's automatically converts all `:` to `_` by Envoy when emitting statistics.
Field `stat_prefix` is used for HTTPConnectionManager, TCPProxy, KafkaBroker (network filter) and RBAC (network filter).
Unlike `alt_stat_name` the field `stat_prefix` doesn't have any restrictions from Envoy.
Kuma sanitizes both fields using `SanitizeMetric` function before setting them on Envoy's resource:

```go
var illegalChars = regexp.MustCompile(`[^a-zA-Z_\-0-9]`)

// We need to sanitize metrics in order to  not break statsd and prometheus format.
// StatsD only allow [a-zA-Z_\-0-9.] characters, everything else is removed
// Extra dots breaks many regexes that converts statsd metric to prometheus one with tags
func SanitizeMetric(metric string) string {
	return illegalChars.ReplaceAllString(metric, "_")
}
```

> I can't find explanation why `alt_stat_name` and `stat_prefix` are treated differently by Envoy. 

Reviewer 2: A use case could be that `stat_prefix` and `alt_stat_name` parameters can be used to consolidate statistics from multiple similar entities under a single name.

For example, if you have separate IPv4 and IPv6 clusters named `my-cluster:v4` and `my-cluster:v6`, you can use `alt_stat_name: my-cluster` for both clusters to aggregate their statistics under the common name `my-cluster` when exporting metrics. This allows you to track related entities as a unified group while maintaining distinct names for configuration purposes.

WDYT?

Author: Ah no, I don't question why there is an actual name and stats name, I just don't understand why `stat_prefix` behaves differently not the same way as `alt_stat_name`.

When Envoy exports metrics in Prometheus format resource name is always emitted as label value, it's never part of the metric name, i.e:
```
envoy_cluster_upstream_cx_total{envoy_cluster_name="localhost_5000"} 0
```

> so there is no reason to replace `:` with `_`.

Reviewer 2: In the past there were stuff in the metric name, I remember we even had some code to change things around. My is that this is the main reason no?

Also when not using prom format doesn't it actually use `:` as a separator see:

<img width="770" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/a47f9fe9-d36b-401a-9a6d-cf85e4c13237" />

Author: > In the past there were stuff in the metric name, I remember we even had some code to change things around. My is that this is the main reason no?

Yeah maybe, but then it's still unclear, why don't they replace `:` in `stat_prefix`? IMO it's just odd that `stat_prefix` and `alt_stat_name` don't have consistent behavior.

> Also when not using prom format doesn't it actually use : as a separator see:

Even though envoy uses `:` as a separator in `/clusters` endpoint, it still takes `cluster.name`, not `cluster.alt_stat_name`:

<img width="384" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/2aca6b75-82aa-4213-82cd-010aae9c4f7e" />

The cluster in the example named `kuma:readiness`

If Envoy tried to support StatsD format then there are still a question, why `stat_prefix` emits metrics with `:` but `alt_stat_name` replaces `:` with `_`.
Also, StatsD format doesn't seem to be supported out-of-the-box by Envoy and requires configuring `stats_sinks` in the static config.

> 

Reviewer 2: Whatever the reason for this, with our new format, do we end up without the need for specifying `stat_prefix` and `alt_stat_name` ? If that's the case that's probably something we should mention and decide whether we still set it (in case) or we don't

Author: Yes, added a note on that

> As the goal of this MADR is to have unified names in Envoy, Metrics, and API, we want `stat_prefix/alt_stat_name` to always be the same as `name`. This makes the use of `stat_prefix/alt_stat_name` unnecessary and once the migration to new naming is completed Kuma won't set these fields anymore.

### Constraints

#### What characters we can use in the identifier?
 
In URL path segment we can use:

```
ALPHA / DIGIT / "-" / "." / "_" / "~" / "!" / "$" / "&" / "'" / "(" / ")" / "*" / "+" / "," / ";" / "=" / ":" / "@"
```

In Envoy resource names we can use any character except `:` if we want to solve [Issue #2363](https://github.com/kumahq/kuma/issues/2363) without workaround.

> In Envoy stats fields we can use any character except `:` to avoid on the fly conversion of `:` to `_` for Cluster names in Prometheus labels.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In Envoy stats fields we can use any character except `:` to avoid on the fly conversion of `:` to `_` for Cluster names in Prometheus label values.
```

Labels have keys and values it's worth being thourough

OpenTelemetry defines "Attribute", it's a key-value pair similar to Prometheus labels.

> There are [no charset limitation on attribute's key or value](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/common/?utm_source=chatgpt.com#attribute).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are [no charset limitation on attribute's key or value](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/common).
```

Worth removing the utm when adding links

This leaves us with the following charset:

```
resource-identifier = *(ALPHA / DIGIT / "-" / "." / "_" / "~" / "!" / "$" / "&" / "'" / "(" / ")" / "*" / "+" / "," / ";" / "=" / "@")
```

_Note: if we'd like to use resource identifier in URL query the charset is significantly smaller:_

```
resource-identifier = *(ALPHA / DIGIT / "-" / "." / "_" / "~" )
```

#### What characters we can use as a delimiter?

As a delimiter we can use only characters that can't be present in resource identifier components – `name`, `mesh`, `namespace`, `zone`, `resourceType` and `sectionName`:

* `name` and `zone`
  * contain no more than 253 characters
  * contain only lowercase alphanumeric characters, '-' or '.'
  * start with an alphanumeric character
  * end with an alphanumeric character
* `mesh`
  * contain no more than 63 characters
  * contain only lowercase alphanumeric characters, '-' or '.'
  * start with an alphanumeric character
  * end with an alphanumeric character
* `namespace`
  * contain at most 63 characters
  * contain only lowercase alphanumeric characters or '-'
  * start with an alphanumeric character
  * end with an alphanumeric character
* `resourceType`

>   * only alphanumeric

Reviewer 2: There's no validation for this atm added: https://github.com/kumahq/kuma/issues/12861

* `sectionName`
  * contain at most 15 characters

>   * contain only lowercase alphanumeric characters or '-'

Reviewer 2: Ho yeah? Where is this defined/validated?

Author: Found it in Kubernetes API reference for [ContainerPort](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/generated/kubernetes-api/v1.26/#containerport-v1-core):
> `name` – If specified, this must be an IANA_SVC_NAME and unique within the pod. Each named port in a pod must have a unique name. Name for the port that can be referred to by services.

And IANA_SVC_NAME is specified in RFC:

> 5.1.  Service Name Syntax
> 
>    Valid service names are hereby normatively defined as follows:
> 
>    o  MUST be at least 1 character and no more than 15 characters long
> 
>    o  MUST contain only US-ASCII [ANSI.X3.4-1986] letters 'A' - 'Z' and
>       'a' - 'z', digits '0' - '9', and hyphens ('-', ASCII 0x2D or
>       decimal 45)
> 
>    o  MUST contain at least one letter ('A' - 'Z' or 'a' - 'z')
> 
>    o  MUST NOT begin or end with a hyphen
> 
>    o  hyphens MUST NOT be adjacent to other hyphens
> 
>    The reason for requiring at least one letter is to avoid service
>    names like "23" (could be confused with a numeric port) or "6000-
>    6063" (could be confused with a numeric port range).  Although
>    service names may contain both upper-case and lower-case letters,
>    case is ignored for comparison purposes, so both "http" and "HTTP"
>    denote the same service.

I checked, and it's indeed validated by the Kubernetes. I'll open an issue so we also validate this on our side

Reviewer 4: > o MUST contain at least one letter ('A' - 'Z' or 'a' - 'z')

> upd: interesting that it doesn't allow names like "8080", at least one letter is required. But we don't have to make sectionName as strict, especially given the fact port's name on Service has a [different requirement](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/generated/kubernetes-api/v1.26/#serviceport-v1-core):

wow! yes very interesting! Nice spot

> Optional if only one ServicePort is defined on this service.

I think this ^ is interesting also, i.e. required if more than one

Author: Updated MADR with newly discovered info on ServicePort's name

For example:
```
kri_mesh-1_us-east-2_kuma-demo_meshservice_backend
kri_mesh-1_us-east-2_kuma-demo_meshservice_backend_http-port
kri_mesh-1___meshtimeout_global-timeouts
```

Having a prefix like `kri` (Kuma Resource Identifier) is useful for two reasons:
* It visually clarifies the format for users, who can then search for the format description in the documentation.
* It acts as an implicit version. If we need to update the format, we can use a different prefix (e.g., `uri` or `ri`).
* It's also ensure no overlap between internal entities (prefixed by `_kuma`) and the rest

**Pros:**
- Shorter
- Resembles existing formats from Amazon
- Still possible to use in URL query

**Cons:**
- Hard to read when names are poorly chosen, e.g., `kri_default_default_default_meshservice_backend`

### Option 2 - Field names in the identifier

We need to pick two delimiters: one to separate keys from values and another to separate key-value pairs.

```yaml
kri;meshservice;mesh=mesh-1;zone=zone-1;namespace=kuma-demo;name=backend;section=http-port
```

**Pros:**

> - Better handling of gaps; no need for `;;` when a value is not defined

Reviewer 5: This format is definitely more readable by human.

```

There is a workaround to use `format=json`
```bash
$ curl http://localhost:9901/listeners\?format\=json
{
 "listener_statuses": [
  {
   "name": "inbound:127.0.0.1:8000",
   "local_address": {
    "socket_address": {
     "address": "127.0.0.1",
     "port_value": 8000
    }
   }
  }
 ]
}
```

#### [Issue #3249](https://github.com/kumahq/kuma/issues/3249): local envoy clusters should have a better name than localhost_<port> 

Today inbound clusters have name `localhost:<port>` and in stats they're visible as `localhost_<port>`.
That's not very informative.

#### [Issue #12733](https://github.com/kumahq/kuma/issues/12733): Envoy statPrefix should not use ip addresses

Using IP address in envoy config statPrefix field can cause issues or generate unnecessary changes in metrics.
This is also problematic for our e2e tests that test envoy config using golden files.

#### [Issue #12093](https://github.com/kumahq/kuma/issues/12093): xds configs, outbound listeners should use the clustername instead of an IP/port combo

We name outbounds like `outbound:10.43.205.116:6379` where IP address doesn't give any useful information.

### Places to use resource identifier

#### URL path

> For example `:5681/path-prefix/<identifier>/path-suffix`. 

Author: Yeah, I'll add that it's out of scope, here it's just an example for clarity. Why isn't `path-prefix` compliant with our specs?

> For example `:5681/path-prefix/<identifier>/path-suffix`. 

Reviewer 2: Cause parts of the path that are neither resource name nor types should be prefixed by `_`

##### Zone Ingress

|          | Name                                                                                                                        | Correlated Resources                           | ResourceIdentifier                                         |
|----------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------|
| Listener | `inbound:10.43.205.116:10001`<br>`inbound:[2001:0db8:85a3:0000:0000:8a2e:0370:7334]:10001`                                  | ZoneIngress                                    | kri_zoneingress__us-east-2_kuma-system_zi1                 |

> | Cluster  | legacy services - `<mesh>:<kuma.io/service>`<br>new Mesh*Services - `<mesh>_<name>_<namespace>_<zone>_<short-name>_<port>`  | Mesh*Service (with sectionName to select port) | kri_meshservice_mesh-1_us-east-2_kuma-demo_backend_httppor |

Author: thanks, fixed

|-------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------|
| Listener    | `inbound:10.43.205.116:10001`<br>`inbound:[2001:0db8:85a3:0000:0000:8a2e:0370:7334]:10001`                                                                      | ZoneEgress                                               | kri_zoneegress__us-east-2_kuma-system_ze1                   |
| Cluster     | legacy services - `<mesh>:<kuma.io/service>`<br>new Mesh*Services - `<mesh>_<name>_<namespace>_<zone>_<short-name>_<port>`                                      | Mesh*Service (with sectionName to select port)           | kri_meshservice_mesh-1_us-east-2_kuma-demo_backend_httpport |
| FilterChain | for external services - `<kuma.io/service>_<mesh>`                                                                                                              | MeshExternalService                                      | kri_meshexternalservice_mesh-1___es1                        |

> | Route       | for external services - `outbound:<kuma.io/service>`                                                                                                            | MeshExternalService                                      | kri_meshexternalservice_mesh-1___es1                        |

Author: Yes, thanks for noticing

|-------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------|
| Cluster     | `meshpassthrough_<protocol>_<match-value>_<port>`<br>when `<port> == 0` Kuma sets port equal to `*`<br>`match-value = CIDR \| IP \| Domain`<br>`CIDR     = i.e. "192.0.2.0/24" or "2001:db8::/32"`<br>`IP       = i.e. "192.0.2.1", or 2001:db8::68", or ::ffff:192.0.2.1"`<br>`Domain   = <dns-name> \| *.<dns-name>`<br>`dns-name = ^([a-zA-Z0-9_]{1}[a-zA-Z0-9_-]{0,62}){1}(\.[a-zA-Z0-9_]{1}[a-zA-Z0-9_-]{0,62})*[\._]?$`<br>  | –                    |

> | FilterChain | when `<match-value> == <protocol>` -> `meshpassthrough_<protocol>_<port>`<br>when `<match-value> != <protocol>` -> `meshpassthrough_<protocol>_<match-value>_<port>`<br>when port is 0 we put `*`, i.e. `meshpassthrough_http_*`<br>`<match-value>` is defined above                                                                                                                                                               | –                    |

Author: We're not changing the way we name clusters originating from MeshPassthrough. Even though we could come up with a name like `kri_meshpassthrough...` + `indexOf(spec.appendMatch)`, I discussed with @lukidzi it's important to keep `port` and `protocol` for the metrics

> | FilterChain | when `<match-value> == <protocol>` -> `meshpassthrough_<protocol>_<port>`<br>when `<match-value> != <protocol>` -> `meshpassthrough_<protocol>_<match-value>_<port>`<br>when port is 0 we put `*`, i.e. `meshpassthrough_http_*`<br>`<match-value>` is defined above                                                                                                                                                               | –                    |

Author: That's interesting idea, I'll add an issue so we could think more about it

##### Internal

|                  | Name                                                                                                                                                                 | Correlated Resources |
|------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------|
| Listener         | `kuma:dns`<br>`kuma:envoy:admin`<br>`kuma:metrics:prometheus`<br>`_kuma:metrics:opentelemetry:<backendName>`                                                         | –                    |
| VirtualHost      | listener's name                                                                                                                                                      | –                    |

> | Internal Cluster | `kuma:readiness`<br>`kuma:envoy:admin`<br>`kuma:metrics:hijacker`<br>`_kuma:metrics:opentelemetry:<backendName>`<br>`tracing:`<br>`access_log_sink`<br>`ads_cluster` | –                    |

Author: I marked internal resources that'll be removed. But I'm not sure if we need to rename resources to kri format when they don't correlate with the store's real resources. For example, `kuma:dns` or `kuma:readiness` are just generated for each DPP and we know they won't collide with anything else. 

I can probably mention that we need to add a `_kuma` prefix

// We need to sanitize metrics in order to  not break statsd and prometheus format.
// StatsD only allow [a-zA-Z_\-0-9.] characters, everything else is removed
// Extra dots breaks many regexes that converts statsd metric to prometheus one with tags
func SanitizeMetric(metric string) string {
	return illegalChars.ReplaceAllString(metric, "_")
}
```

I can't find explanation why `alt_stat_name` and `stat_prefix` are treated differently by Envoy. 
When Envoy exports metrics in Prometheus format resource name is always emitted as label value, it's never part of the metric name, i.e:
```
envoy_cluster_upstream_cx_total{envoy_cluster_name="localhost_5000"} 0
```
so there is no reason to replace `:` with `_`.

If Envoy tried to support StatsD format then there are still a question, why `stat_prefix` emits metrics with `:` but `alt_stat_name` replaces `:` with `_`.
Also, StatsD format doesn't seem to be supported out-of-the-box by Envoy and requires configuring `stats_sinks` in the static config.

As the goal of this MADR is to have unified names in Envoy, Metrics, and API, we want `stat_prefix/alt_stat_name` to always be the same as `name`.

> This makes the use of `stat_prefix/alt_stat_name` unnecessary and once the migration to new naming is completed Kuma won't set these fields anymore.

Author: I changed so now there are only 2 paragraphs in this section, one that covers the current state and the second explains why we won't use `stat_prefix` anymore. I removed the middle part with the Envoy discrepancy between handling `stat_prefix` and `alt_stat_name` as it's irrelevant to the MADR

SDK [provides a way](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/common/#attribute-limits) to configure attribute length limit,
but it's set to `Infinity` by default.  

This leaves us with the following charset:

```
resource-identifier = *(ALPHA / DIGIT / "-" / "." / "_" / "~" / "!" / "$" / "&" / "'" / "(" / ")" / "*" / "+" / "," / ";" / "=" / "@")
```

_Note: if we'd like to use resource identifier in URL query the charset is significantly smaller:_

```
resource-identifier = *(ALPHA / DIGIT / "-" / "." / "_" / "~" )
```

#### What characters we can use as a delimiter?

As a delimiter we can use only characters that can't be present in resource identifier components – `name`, `mesh`, `namespace`, `zone`, `resourceType` and `sectionName`:

* `name` and `zone`
  * contain no more than 253 characters
  * contain only lowercase alphanumeric characters, '-' or '.'
  * start with an alphanumeric character
  * end with an alphanumeric character
* `mesh`
  * contain no more than 63 characters
  * contain only lowercase alphanumeric characters, '-' or '.'
  * start with an alphanumeric character

>   * end with an alphanumeric character

Author: Good catch, fixed

- Kuma API GET endpoints shouldn't require core name to read the resource 
- Human-readable: users should be able to type the identifier manually if needed, so it's not hashed
- Envoy resources that have direct correlation with Kuma resources should be named by using resource identifier, i.e. outbound cluster can be named after MeshService
- Ability to use resource identifier in Prometheus queries, i.e
  - `my_metric{envoy_cluster_name~="kri.*_meshservice_.*"} // Get only actual outbounds from meshservice`
  - `my_metric{envoy_cluster_name~="kri_default_.*.*"} // Get only stuff on the default mesh`

## Considered Options

* Option 1 - Order-based, no field names in the identifier
* Option 2 - Field names in the identifier

## Decision Outcome

* Option 1 - Order-based, no field names in the identifier

## Pros and Cons of the Options

### Option 1 - Order-based, no field names in the identifier

We need to pick a delimiter that's present in the `delimiter` charset we've specified above.

There is an identifier format from Amazon called [ARN](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/IAM/latest/UserGuide/reference-arns.html). We can adopt a similar approach, but using `_`:

```

> kri_<resource-type>_<mesh>_<zone>_<namespace>_<resource-name>_<section-name>

Reviewer 2: Could we have an optional `suffix` ? I already envision use cases where actually we can't sumup with a single kri even with a sectionName and we still need to append some `hash` at the end?

I'd argue strongly against the `hashes` if it came up but I'm sure it's gonna come up.

Another probably better option is to explicitly state that if needs for a suffix was required we will need to create a MADR. This enable us to leave this door open but clearly say it should never be required. From looking at the discussion in: https://github.com/kumahq/kuma/issues/13129 clearly it seems that it'd be necessary

Author: This reminded me we should probably treat `sectionName` as an optional suffix, because when it's missing, we don't want to have a trailing `_`, like 
```
kri_meshservice_mesh-1_us-east-1_kuma-demo_mt1_
```

So maybe we can put `sectionName` after some delimiter, because strictly speaking `sectionName` is not a resource identifier, it's a reference inside the specific resource:
```
kri_<resource-type>_<mesh>_<zone>_<namespace>_<resource-name>&sectionName=httpport
OR
kri_<resource-type>_<mesh>_<zone>_<namespace>_<resource-name>&sn=httpport
```

and then like you said if we need another suffix, we will create MADR to add another KV pair behind `&`, i.e. `hash` 
```
kri_<resource-type>_<mesh>_<zone>_<namespace>_<resource-name>&sn=httpport,hash=e3a0069bda479bd1
```

WDYT?

Reviewer 2: I'd rather have section be the default with a trailing `_` the rest can wait for a future MADR

Author: Added a note:

> #### ResourceIdentifier format is open for extension in the future MADRs
>
> Today when generating clusters for Builtin Gateway, we use the hash suffix to support a MeshService cluster per MeshGateway listener. If we want cluster name to follow `kri` format, we need to extend the format with a new MADR.

```

`resource-type` is a lowercased singular resource type, i.e. `meshservice`, `meshtimeout`, etc. 

> We use this name in [kumactl](https://github.com/kumahq/kuma/blob/d7ec0a2b1ac19208fb7dd9726309e3cf8cdc5848/pkg/core/resources/apis/meshservice/api/v1alpha1/zz_generated.resource.go#L153).

Author: Changed `<resource-type>` to `shortName`

For example:
```
kri_meshservice_mesh-1_us-east-2_kuma-demo_backend
kri_meshservice_mesh-1_us-east-2_kuma-demo_backend_http-port
kri_meshtimeout_mesh-1___global-timeouts
```

Having a prefix like `kri` (Kuma Resource Identifier) is useful for two reasons:
* It visually clarifies the format for users, who can then search for the format description in the documentation.
* It acts as an implicit version. If we need to update the format, we can use a different prefix (e.g., `uri` or `ri`).
* It's also ensure no overlap between internal entities (prefixed by `_kuma`) and the rest

#### Secrets naming in Envoy

Renaming secrets in Envoy is out of the scope of this MADR. 
Only `mesh_ca` secret in `builtin` mode has a corresponding Secret resource in the store.
In all other cases, secrets are either stored in memory, or obtained using DataSource or fetched from external systems,
so it's not straightforward how to apply `kri` concept.  
Also, it's not clear what problems and limitations do we have when it comes to naming secrets in Envoy.

**Pros:**
- Shorter

> - Resembles existing formats from Amazon

Reviewer 2: and Konnect

| Inbound Cluster   | `localhost:<port>`                                                                                                                                                                                      | Dataplane (with sectionName to select port)                                                                                              | kri_dp_mesh-1_us-east-2_kuma-demo_backend-app_8080   |
| Outbound Cluster  | legacy clusters - `<kuma.io/service>-hash(dst.tags)`<br>legacy clusters cross-mesh - `<kuma.io/service>-hash(dst.tags)_<mesh>`<br>new clusters - `<mesh>_<name>_<namespace>_<zone>_<short-name>_<port>` | Mesh*Service (with sectionName to select port)                                                                                           | kri_msvc_mesh-1_us-east-2_kuma-demo_backend_httpport |

> | Route             | Routes are set on Listener on VirtualHost.<br>On inbound - `inbound:<kuma.io/service>`<br>On outbound - `<hash_sha256([]Match{...})>`                                                                   | Envoy Route is a merge product of multiple MeshHTTPRoutes.<br/> We can use only the most specific MeshHTTPRoute policy to name the route | kri_mhttpr_mesh-1_us-east-2_kuma-demo_route-1_       |

Reviewer 6: What will be the name for default routes, since we don't need a policy to get ones?

Author: We probably should treat it as an internal entity, so it has to start with `_kuma`, I'll update the doc

Reviewer 6: How would it look like? Since, we might have a lot of default routes it's hard to say

Author: What do you mean by "a lot of default routes"? Don't we have just one [catchAll](https://github.com/kumahq/kuma/blob/820494cf59e22d5a4870ca6d7a01f1f77e38ad46/pkg/plugins/policies/meshhttproute/plugin/v1alpha1/listeners.go#L196) route? It probably can be named something like `_kuma_catchAll` but I don't want to be too specific in this document about the way we name internal entities, it should be out of the scope, I left a note:
> Following the  [Internal listeners naming convention](036-internal-listeners.md) we need to rename internal listeners and clusters to start with `_`. Additionally, we need to get rid of `:` in internal entities names and use `_` instead.

# Resource Identifier

* Status: accepted

> ## Context and Problem Statement

Reviewer 2: There's prior work around this from @Automaat and @lukidzi we should reference it here.

Lukasz made a MADR about cluster names
Automaat made a MADR about internal envoy entities

Reviewer 2: It's also fine mentioning the PR and the few issues that mention the need for this

Author: Referenced both MADRs in the context.

Kuma multizone mode allows synchronizing state between multiple clusters. Zone Control Planes connect to the Global Control Plane, forming a tree with the Global CP as the root.

There are several resource synchronization patterns:
- A resource is created on the Global CP and synced down to all Zone CPs.
- A resource is created on a Zone CP and synced to the Global CP.
- A resource is created on a Zone CP and synced to other Zone CPs.

For example, the Zone CP in `zone-1` can possess the following MeshTimeouts:
- MeshTimeouts created in `zone-1`
- MeshTimeouts created on the Global CP and synced to `zone-1`
- MeshTimeouts created in `zone-2` and synced to `zone-1`

> To uniquely identify a resource regardless of its place of origin, Kuma uses the following Go structure:

Reviewer 2: In the ctx you need to specify where we're planning to use it. And then we need to check that the charset of this fits the places you are planning to use it in

```go
type ResourceIdentifier struct {
    Name      string
    Mesh      string
    Namespace string
    Zone      string
}
```

When mixing identifiers of different resource types, an extended version is used:

```go
type TypedResourceIdentifier struct {
    ResourceIdentifier

    ResourceType ResourceType
    SectionName  string
}

> ```

Reviewer 2: Any reason to not always have the more complete version and make things easier?

Author: right, no reason to have both https://github.com/kumahq/kuma/issues/12831

Currently, the resource identifier lacks a string representation and is not exposed to the Kuma public API. The goal of this MADR is to propose a format.

> 

Reviewer 2: Should we mention that this identifier will be usable in the API to at least get the value?

## Decision Drivers

> - Possible to use the identifier in a URL path as `:5681/_rules/<identifier>`

Reviewer 2: Can we consider using this for xds entities too?

Author: yes, updated

- Human-readable: users should be able to type the identifier manually if needed

## Considered Options

* Option 1 - Order-based, no field names in the identifier

> * Option 2 - Field names in the identifier

Reviewer 7: Is it possible to use json body to pass the properties(zones, namespaces, meshes)?
Once if we have one property with empty value, it looks weird in the url. My first sense about option 1 and 2 is too long or order-based looks complicated

Author: We also want to use resource identifier when naming Envoy resources, that's why we'd like to have a stringified format

## Decision Outcome

* Option 1 - Order-based, no field names in the identifier

## Pros and Cons of the Options

### Option 1 - Order-based, no field names in the identifier

We need to pick a delimiter that's allowed in the URL path and not allowed in resource names, meshes, namespaces, or zones. Good candidates are `:` and `_`.

There is an identifier format from Amazon called [ARN](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/IAM/latest/UserGuide/reference-arns.html). We can adopt a similar approach:

```

> kri:<mesh>:<zone>:<namespace>:<resource-type>:<resource-name>:<section-name>

Reviewer 2: What's the charset of each of these components?

I think mesh/zone/namespace/rType/rName is straightforward but how is it for section name?

What are the current possible section name?

Reviewer 2: What's the value for zone when the entity is global?

Author: > What's the value for zone when the entity is global?

It's an empty string `""`, i.e. one of the examples below `kri:mesh-1:::meshtimeout:global-timeouts`

```
For example:
```
kri:mesh-1:us-east-2:kuma-demo:meshservice:backend
kri:mesh-1:us-east-2:kuma-demo:meshservice:backend:http-port
kri:mesh-1:::meshtimeout:global-timeouts
```

Having a prefix like `kri` (Kuma Resource Identifier) is useful for two reasons:
* It visually clarifies the format for users, who can then search for the format description in the documentation.

> * It acts as an implicit version. If we need to update the format, we can use a different prefix (e.g., `uri` or `ri`).

Reviewer 2: IMO we should either always have the type or provide 2 option with and without the type. Otherwise it's hard to figure which one it is (my 2c is that it should be the full with the type always).

Author: By this line:
> It acts as an implicit version. If we need to update the format, we can use a different prefix (e.g., `uri` or `ri`).

I just wanted to say why it's good to have a special prefix in the resource identifier like "kri" or something else. 

Resource types like `meshservice` or `meshtimeout` should always be part of the identifier.

**Pros:**
- Shorter
- Resembles existing formats from Amazon

**Cons:**
- Hard to read when names are poorly chosen, e.g., `kri:default:default:default:meshservice:backend`

### Option 2 - Field names in the identifier

We need to pick two delimiters: one to separate keys from values and another to separate key-value pairs.

```yaml

> kri:meshservice:mesh=mesh-1:zone:zone-1:namespace=kuma-demo:name=backend:section=http-port

Reviewer: Would it be possible to use random order and specify only some of the fields, to select multiple resources? 

If not then I think not using field name makes more sense as you still need to remember order and fields

Author: No, fields should be sorted, I want resource identifier to be comparable by `==`. When it comes to multiple resources that's a different feature – implement resource selector using the same format. It will be possible in the future.

|-------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------|
| Inbound Listener  | `inbound:10.43.205.116:8080`<br>`inbound:[2001:0db8:85a3:0000:0000:8a2e:0370:7334]:8080`                                                                                                                | Dataplane (with sectionName to select port)    |
| Outbound Listener | `outbound:10.43.205.116:8080`<br>`outbound:[2001:0db8:85a3:0000:0000:8a2e:0370:7334]:8080`                                                                                                              | Mesh*Service (with sectionName to select port) |
| VirtualHost       | legacy listeners - `<kuma.io/service>`<br>new outbounds - `<mesh>_<name>_<namespace>_<zone>_<short-name>_<port>`                                                                                        | Mesh*Service (with sectionName to select port) |

> | Inbound Cluster   | `localhost:<port>`                                                                                                                                                                                      | Dataplane (with sectionName to select port)    |

Author: Yes, the function `GetLocalClusterName` is used in multiple places https://github.com/kumahq/kuma/blob/0fbf884b4bcee672ee93ca5d748b3293be7f3d9a/pkg/xds/envoy/names/resource_names.go#L26

| Secret      | `name       = <category>:<scope>:<identifier>`<br>`category   = "mesh_ca" \| "identity_cert"`<br>`scope      = "secret"`<br>`identifier = "all" \| <mesh_name>` | TODO                                           |

##### MeshPassthrough

|             | Name                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | Correlated Resources |
|-------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------|

> | Cluster     | `meshpassthrough_<protocol>_<match-value>_<port>`<br>when `<port> == 0` Kuma sets port equal to `*`<br>`match-value = CIDR \| IP \| Domain`<br>`CIDR     = i.e. "192.0.2.0/24" or "2001:db8::/32"`<br>`IP       = i.e. "192.0.2.1", or 2001:db8::68", or ::ffff:192.0.2.1"`<br>`Domain   = <dns-name> \| *.<dns-name>`<br>`dns-name = ^([a-zA-Z0-9_]{1}[a-zA-Z0-9_-]{0,62}){1}(\.[a-zA-Z0-9_]{1}[a-zA-Z0-9_-]{0,62})*[\._]?$`<br>  | –                    |

Reviewer 7: > passthroughMode: (Optional) Defines behaviour for handling traffic. Allowed values: All, None and Matched. Default: None

What does the identifier should be if `All` and `None` ?

Author: yeah, we actually removing them when MeshPassthrough is used https://github.com/kumahq/kuma/blob/6c44719740ef47d1de10564c5db094f946f29989/pkg/plugins/policies/meshpassthrough/plugin/v1alpha1/plugin.go#L98
